# **Automated Adipocyte Cell Identifier and Annotator** #

## Description
For the past year, I have worked under Dr. Nabil Rabhi in the Biochemistry Department over at Medical Campus. There I have learned the basics of the single-cell RNA sequencing pipeline, doing quality control, annotation, and now analysis. Through this process I found there are several rather tedious steps in the process that have the potential to be automated with specialized packages and models. There exists several annotation packages in which you can train the model with self-provided data sets. However, very few packages exist that are pre-trained. My proposed package would be one such pre-trained model, specialized on adipose tissue. This model would then be able to be used in my, as well as others, analysis of adipose tissue, allowing for an ease of identification and annotation of sequenced data.
### Cell Type Annotator
My proposed annotator would be a model trained with existing datasets. The model will be able to take an input data set, identify ideal clustering resolution(s) [see Heirarchical Annotation subheading], identify most likely cell type by cluster based on existing knowledge of cell markers, and identify potential new cell types or pathways. 
### Single-Cell Annotation Process - For Those Who are Unfamiliar
For those unfamiliar with the cell annotation process, for each cluster the top N markers are looked at (usually N is around 5, but can vary depending on the context and case); there is no unanimous cell marker database, rather cell markers come from the compilation of markers identified in existing studies and publications. The current most comprehensive database is CellMarker 2.0[https://academic.oup.com/nar/article/51/D1/D870/6775381]. The top N markers are then compared to existing known markers in an attempt to identify the cell type. Often these markers will not match exactly, and often only a fraction of the known markers may be present in a cluster. These unrecognized markers, markers that are among the top N expressed but have not been identified in previous publications, may be indicative of either new cell (sub)types or new pathways. Cell pathways are a series of actions among molecules in a cell that leads to a certain product or a change in the cell (National Human Genome Research Institute, NHGRI). Essentially, unknown markers may be indicative of this change of cell state.
#### Heirarchical Annotation
As cells can have different levels of classification (e.g. Adipocytes, white/brown/beige adipocyte, pre-adipocyte, etc.) heirarchical annotation lends itself to the process of understanding how individual cells change and interact with a larger group. While heirarchical annotatin may initially seem complex, it is little more than annotating the dataset at different resolutions and identifying which clusters at a lower resolution give way to more specific and refined clusters at higher resolution. This part of my package would simply utilize the trained model to predict the most likely markers at each relevant resolution. I would also like to implement some method to help identify which resolutions are key resolutions, but heirarchical annotion is absouletly possible without this step.
### Identification of Unknown/New cell types and pathways
As alluded to in the previous description, I aim to train a model which can aid in identifying unknown or new cell types and pathways. I propose this be done by utilizing the confidence of each prediction. When predicting the cell type of a cluster from known markers, the model would report how closely a cluster fits to known cell-type markers (how many known markers are present, their rank of expression in top N markers, proportion of cells expressing known markers, etc.). I see this identification being most prominent with the heirarchical annotation. Take for example a dataset where at a low resolution, known cell-type cluster, splits into several smaller clusters at a higher resolution. I plan to implement this model to display the most likely cell type(s) for each sub-cluster. I am not certain on the exact method I would use to compute and predict the likelihood of each cell type, but that is to be explored and refined in this class. 
### Existing Resources
While this annotator may seem ambitious, my year of experience has lent me some invaluable resources. In preparing to process the current dataset, we (the lab) created an extensive adipocyte cell marker database from existing published works. This will reduce the work time for data collection and referencing as I already have access to known markers, allowing me to dedicate more time to the contruction and refinement of my model. While our cell marker database will eliminate some required reference data gathering, I plan to use that additional time to establish an extensive dataset with which to train my model [see Data Collection subheading]. Along with the physical existing resources, I also have a deeper than surface-level understanding of using Numpy, Pandas, SciPy, and similar packages. Becasue of this, I think this project is within my reasonable scope to achieve in the given timeframe.

## Goals
The goal of this project is to create an automated adipocyte cell annotator that identifies ideal cluster resolution and predicts most-likely cell types of clusters. Along with predicting celltypes based on known markers, this annotator identify unknown or new celltypes for user review to help aid in the identification of potential new cell types and/or pathways.

## Data Collection
I plan to a utilize public data sets from the National Library of Medicine - National Center for Biotechnology Information (NLM-NCBI) genomics data repository, the Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) [https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/gds/?term=adipose]. There are over 75,000 public datasets containing adipose tissue sequencing. I will then select a subset of these to use as my testing/training sets. I currently plan to select around 20 datasets to ensure comprehensive training and testing. I want to ensure thorough coverage of adipocyte types (white, brown, and beige), species (human and mice), and adipocyte cell suptypes; a complete dataset for this project will include multiple examples of both species and all adipocyte types and subtypes.

## Data Visualization
The overall clustering and type annotation will be visualized with a t-SNE plot, however a heirarchical cell marker tree will be essential to conveying predictions. This tree is a more niche presentation of results. Each level of the tree denotes the clusters at a given resolution with branches leading to sub-clusters. This visualization typically also includes some figure depicting marker genes identified in each cluster. One additional aspect I hope to include in my visualization is a confidence or liklihood prediction for unknown/new cell types.

## Test Plan
I plan to use a 70-20-10 split for training, validation, and test data. While some approaches may use a completely random method to divide the data into training and testing, due to the nature of my data I want to ensure the most comprehensive training of my model as possible. This means ensuring each phase is exposed to both human and mouse datasets along with the full expanse of cell types. With my target of using at least 20 existing datasets, this would ensure at least 2 sets will be used in the testing phase (a human and mouse data set). Although, this target number of datasets will most likely increase as I hope to make my model as robust and comprehensive as possible, ensuring proper validation (including testing for failure).
